this video is based on a joke
presentation I gave last year I was
recently on the phone with an Internet
service provider whose name shall remain
unspoken because they promised me there
are mediocre Internet services for one
price and then charged me another price
and you may not be surprised to hear
that price B was greater than price a so
I was on the phone to see if I could get
B to equal a which reminds me of the
first of the axioms or laws of Zermelo
Fraenkel set theory for those of you who
don't know sir melo Fraenkel set theory
is the how shall i put it
pedantry that forms the foundation of
modern mathematics and to get a good
idea you only really need to know two
things about it
it exists that's a math joke though I
guess this whole video is and using the
Sir Melo Frankel axioms the number two
is written like this which in English
reads the set that contains the set that
contains only the set containing nothing
as well as the set containing nothing
yeah yeah okay so the first axiom or law
of Zermelo Fraenkel set theory says that
two sets are equal if they have the same
elements however the internet company
that shall not be named was providing
the same set of services for different
prices so B doesn't equal a but they
both contain the same set of services
this is a violation of the first axiom
of Zermelo Fraenkel set theory at this
point perhaps I should have been worried
but I continued nevertheless I again
asked for price a and they replied the
option we offered is all that we can
offer I was horrified for you see the
second axiom of zur Mela Fraenkel set
theory implies that a set can't be a
member of itself and yet they had just
said that the set of all options they
could offer was the same as the option
they offered which clearly must be
contained in the set of all options they
could offer and thus they violated the
second axiom upon which modern
mathematics is built let me speak to
your manager I said which is code for I
think your axiomatic system is crap but
as expected the manager did not
immediately improve the situation just
so we're all on the same page I simply
wanted internet for the promised
price a let's say $40 but had been
charged B say $50 for the same service
and I had been told that $50 is the best
offer they can make the manager promptly
offered me internet plus a home Wi-Fi
router for $45 you might think this is
an improvement as I did until I asked if
I could have the offer of internet plus
router but hold the router and I was
told no the third axiom of Zermelo
Fraenkel set theory was not happy with
that
because you're supposed to be able to
make a subset out of elements of a set
and have that also be a set but
apparently not in the world of Internet
service providers this also violates
axiom six by the way but we don't need
to get into that the fifth axiom
combining existing sets together into
new sets well I have to give it to the
Internet companies they've got this down
pat though they call it bundling the
violation of the seventh axiom the axiom
of infinity is to be honest more our
criticism of modern mathematics than
telecommunication companies though they
still violate it
speaking as a physicist I can tell you
that Internet service providers and any
other physical thing in our apparently
non continuous finite size observable
universe they can't have an infinite
amount of anything I can't even say they
have an infinite absence of customer
service because that would require the
possibility of an infinite amount for
them to be lacking but there was still
something bugging me the manager told me
that the offer for $45 was comprised of
Internet for $40 a month plus five bucks
a month for the router so breaking
things down the possible monthly
services provided include internet for
$40 Internet for $50 TV phone and Wi-Fi
router for $5.00 now it was clear that
internet for $40 was an element of the
set called internet plus router and
internet plus router was an element of
possible service combinations while
internet for $40 on its own was not and
yet the possible service combinations
should include all possible combinations
of services which Zermelo Frankel would
call the power set and thus I realized
that the eighth axiom was violated and
also the fourth I
think at this point we'd hit all eight
axioms and my internet company had
violated seven of them but as all of you
doubtless know the standard sir melo
franco axioms often come packaged with a
ninth axiom and you need only see the
name to know this axiom is seriously
violated by telecommunication companies
and so I almost despaired except despair
can't be constructed without the axiom
schema of specification and then I
remembered something important even if
all of the axioms I holds dear are
violated that doesn't mean there's no
logic or reason remaining what's true in
the mathematical world depends on what
underlying axioms you take to be true so
I said hang on and took a deep breath
can I get the $45 option which consists
of Internet for $40 and a router for 5
bucks a month and then just send you
back the router so I don't have to pay
for it and you know what the guy from
the internet company told me he told me
what every scheming mathematician loves
to hear from their axioms I can't tell
you you can't do that the end this story
is partly based on the truth I'll leave
you to figure out which parts and I
first told it at the festival of bad ad
hoc hypotheses where the idea is to
listen to crazy made-up scientific
theories in the hope that will be both
entertained and more aware of how
science actually works and you can
listen to more entertaining stories
science and otherwise on audible this
videos sponsor audible has the largest
selection of audiobooks on the planet
including bestsellers mysteries memoirs
originals and science books I very much
enjoyed and highly recommend how not to
be wrong by Jordan elenberg a more
correct but similarly sarcastic book
about how to use simple math to not be
wrong it has plenty of fascinating
stories of big mistakes that have been
made because people misused math plus
you learn how not to be wrong to start
listening with a 30-day trial go to
audible.com slash minutephysics or text
minutephysics to five hundred five
hundred and you can choose one audiobook
and two audible originals each month
again that's audible.com slash
minutephysics
or text minutephysics to 500 500 and
thanks to audible for their support